“I often imagine this pump station as a post-apocalyptic monastery, like after a nuclear event or asteroid strike or a major die-off, where monks will be stationed here to live out their lives in retreat, practicing and tending to this pump for the good of the planet.”

I peer back at Joe’s post-apocalyptic pump house and imagine two saffron-robed stewards pacing out from their station-turned-monastery. “Did you know that, in 1914, nearly 80 percent of the world’s copper came from Butte?” he said, kicking dirt and adjusting his cap before droning on about copper’s ten-thousand-year history of human use, pendants found in northern Iraq dating back to 8700 BCE. Three hours into the circuit and fully trespassing, Joe and I walk in silence in order to keep a low profile, contouring the northern arc of the loop and the tailing ponds, where we lose sight of the pit. At one turn the road tapers to nothing, eroding into the tailing pond, The City That Ate Itself, a landscape of self harm, an ecological “sacrifice zone,” a phrase extended to the human communities here in Butte/Silver Bow County, with one of the country’s highest per capita suicide rates, double that of the national average. I imagine this place as one living, breathing cell replete with all third-grade biology class functions: mitochondrial roads shuttle dump trucks to remove waste; cytoplasm and ribosomes as tailing ponds for storage; warehouses pulverize rock to access their energetic payout, its lysosome; and the nucleus in the middle, the pit, an eye around which spins a dark seed full of sulfuric acid, deep frying anything that comes too close. “Tricky because there isn’t one.”

Joe and his wife Sherry moved to Butte, Montana, in 1990. Butte, Montana, 1942. Credit: Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division, Farm Security Administration/Office of War Information Black-and-White Negatives
Long before Europeans arrived here, the Snt’apqey, or Silver Bow Creek, offered abundance to the Indigenous Salish, Shoshone-Bannock, Pend d’Oreille, and Blackfoot for hunting and fishing. At one point, three out of every four Montanans worked for the Anaconda Copper Company. Several decades ago, Butte was known as an ugly duckling, what Michael Punke in Fire and Brimstone called a city with an “expectation of imminent abandonment.” Arsenic smoke hung in the air like a perpetual fart while underground operations proved fatal, averaging a kill a week. Everything changed following World War II, when advancements in open-pit mining technology developed elsewhere and Butte couldn’t compete, as the city literally sat atop its wealth.