Before Butte’s mining boom started in the mid-1800s, creeks tumbled freely off the Continental Divide to drain into the Clark Fork River, the Columbia, and, eventually, the Pacific Ocean. With fish kills and widespread health concerns over a hundred miles downstream, in 1987, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) designated Butte/Silver Bow Creek a Superfund site, the single largest environmental cleanup designation in US history. Butte’s red-light district was known for employing more than a thousand unionized sex workers as Irish, Italian, Chinese, Finnish, German, and other immigrants flooded in with sights set on future prosperity, as if the underground flitted in something sacrosanct. Butte, Montana, 1942. Credit: Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division, Farm Security Administration/Office of War Information Black-and-White Negatives
Long before Europeans arrived here, the Snt’apqey, or Silver Bow Creek, offered abundance to the Indigenous Salish, Shoshone-Bannock, Pend d’Oreille, and Blackfoot for hunting and fishing. It had previously been removing several million gallons daily from underground shafts, and now the mines filled with contaminated water, which also filled the pit. Seasonal flooding continued to leach heavy doses of toxic metals from the pit into the Clark Fork River, poisoning aquatic life with a heavy burden of cadmium, arsenic, and mercury. Credit: Michael Crummett/Library of Congress
I visited Butte’s subterranean world a month before the walk, via the city’s World Museum of Mining, which leads tours underground. At one turn the road tapers to nothing, eroding into the tailing pond, The City That Ate Itself, a landscape of self harm, an ecological “sacrifice zone,” a phrase extended to the human communities here in Butte/Silver Bow County, with one of the country’s highest per capita suicide rates, double that of the national average. This system defines the “protective level”—insofar as contamination stays below this threshold, Butte’s groundwater remains intact. Around The Pit
Circling billions of gallons of toxic water at America’s largest Superfund site.